feat: add view based access control documentation (#458)
vaadin/docs: articles/flow/security/best-practices.asciidoc

The application needs to be aware of this and check if the currently logged-in user has access rights to this entity.
This is something that is common to all UI frameworks, and not specific to Vaadin.

// end::authentication-authorization[]
// tag::spring-security-integration-ref[]
Examples for integrating Spring Security can be found in
// end::spring-security-integration-ref[]
https://vaadin.com/tutorials/securing-your-app-with-spring-security[Securing your app with Spring Security].

== View-Based Access Control

[role="since:com.vaadin:vaadin@V21 standalone"]
--
--

Since Vaadin 21, it is possible to use a built-in view-based access control mechanism to secure Flow navigation targets.
However, as mentioned in <<Authentication and Authorization,Authentication and Authorization>>, it is not mandatory to use it, so it is not enabled by default.
The view-based access control mechanism uses the `@AnonymousAllowed`, `@PermitAll`, `@RolesAllowed`, and `@DenyAll` annotations on view classes to define the access control rules.

> .There is a detailed document for Flow applications based on Spring Boot
> [NOTE]
> If your Vaadin Flow application is based on Spring Boot, we strongly recommend following the dedicated documentation on using <<{articles}/flow/integrations/spring/view-based-access-control#, View-Based Access Control in Vaadin Flow Spring Boot applications>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See <<{articles}/flow/integrations/spring/view-based-access-control#, View-Based Access Control>> for detailed information about enabling the access control mechanism in Vaadin Flow Spring Boot applications.
```

To enable and use this mechanism, the following should be added to a Vaadin Flow application (if it does not exist already):

> - A Login view.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A login view.
```

- A `VaadinServiceInitListener` that adds `ViewAccessChecker` as the `BeforeEnterListener` of all UIs.

> - A Service Provider under `META-INF/services` to load above the custom ServiceInitListener via the Java SPI loading mechanism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A Service Provider under `META-INF/services` to load above the custom [classname]#ServiceInitListener# via the Java SPI loading mechanism.
```

=== Adding Login View
Having a login view is one of the basic requirements of many authentication and authorization mechanisms.
It serves to redirect anonymous users to that page before granting access to view any protected resources.

> .`LoginView.java`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.[filename]#LoginView.java#
```

[source,java]
----
@Route("login")
@PageTitle("Login")
public class LoginView extends VerticalLayout implements BeforeEnterObserver {

    private LoginForm login = new LoginForm();

    public LoginView() {
        addClassName("login-view");
        setSizeFull();

        setJustifyContentMode(JustifyContentMode.CENTER);
        setAlignItems(Alignment.CENTER);

        login.setAction("login");

        add(new H1("Test Application"), login);
    }

    @Override
    public void beforeEnter(BeforeEnterEvent beforeEnterEvent) {
        if(beforeEnterEvent.getLocation()
            .getQueryParameters()
            .getParameters()
            .containsKey("error")) {
            login.setError(true);
        }
    }
}
----

> .Usage of Vaadin's LoginForm Component
> [NOTE]
> In this example, Vaadin's `LoginForm` component is used for the sake of brevity.
> However, feel free to implement your own login view, if you wish.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, Vaadin's Login Form component is used for the sake of brevity.
However, feel free to implement your own login view, if you wish.
```

=== Adding VaadinServiceInitListener
In order to restrict access to views, a `BeforeEnterListener` must be registered for the `VaadinService`, to initialize and enable the `ViewAccessChecker`:

> .ViewAccessCheckerInitializer.java

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.[filename]#ViewAccessCheckerInitializer.java#
```

    public void serviceInit(ServiceInitEvent serviceInitEvent) {
        serviceInitEvent.getSource().addUIInitListener(uiInitEvent -> {
            uiInitEvent.getUI().addBeforeEnterListener(viewAccessChecker); // <4>
        });
    }
}
----

The above code contains some notable components of the view-based access control mechanism:

<1> `ViewAccessChecker`, which is at the core of this access control mechanism, is instantiated.
<2> `ViewAccessChecker` is enabled. Note that it is not enabled by default.
<3> `LoginView` class is set to the `viewAccessChecker` instance. Now it knows where to redirect unauthenticated users.
<4> The `viewAccessChecker` instance is set as the `BeforeEnterListener` in the overridden `serviceInit` method.
Now it is ready to intercept attempts to enter all views.

However, the above class still needs to be loaded, so we recommend following the instructions in the next step.

=== Enable Loading of VaadinServiceInitListener
To enable the Java SPI loading mechanism to load the above `ViewAccessCheckerInitializer` as the `VaadinServiceInitListener`, do the following:

- Under `resources/META-INF/services` directory, create a file named exactly:

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
```

[text,text]
----
com.vaadin.flow.server.VaadinServiceInitListener
----

- Put the fully qualified name of `ViewAccessCheckerInitializer` into this newly created file.
For example, if the [classname]#ViewAccessCheckerInitializer# class is in the `org.vaadin.example.security` package, the following value should be in the file:

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
```

> .Text value that should be the `com.vaadin.flow.server.VaadinServiceInitListener` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Text value that should be in the `com.vaadin.flow.server.VaadinServiceInitListener` file:
```

[text,text]
----
org.vaadin.example.security.ViewAccessCheckerInitializer
----

This Service Provider config file triggers the Java SPI loading mechanism to load `ViewAccessCheckerInitializer` during application startup.

> More information on this can be found <<{articles}/flow/advanced/service-init-listener#,here>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More information on this can be found in <<{articles}/flow/advanced/service-init-listener#,VaadinServiceInitListener>>.
```

=== Access Annotations
Before we see some examples of access annotations, it is worth having a closer look at the annotations, and their meaning when applied to a view:

- [classname]#@AnonymousAllowed# permits anyone to navigate to the view without any authentication or authorization.
- [classname]#@PermitAll# allows any *authenticated* user to navigate to the view.
- [classname]#@RolesAllowed# grants access to users having the roles specified in the annotation value.
- [classname]#@DenyAll# disallows everyone from navigating to the view.
This is the default, which means that, if a view is not annotated at all, the [classname]#@DenyAll# logic is applied.

Some usage examples:

> .Example of using @AnonymousAllowed to enable all users to navigate to this view

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Example of using [classname]#@AnonymousAllowed# to enable all users to navigate to this view
```

[source,java]
----
@Route(value = "", layout = MainView.class)
@PageTitle("Public View")
@AnonymousAllowed
public class PublicView extends VerticalLayout {
    // ...
}
----

> .Example of using @PermitAll to allow only authenticated users (with any role) to navigate to this view

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Example of using [classname]#@PermitAll# to allow only authenticated users (with any role) to navigate to this view
```

[source,java]
----
@Route(value = "private", layout = MainView.class)
@PageTitle("Private View")
@PermitAll
public class PrivateView extends VerticalLayout {
    // ...
}
----

> .Example of using @RolesAllowed to enable only users with the `ADMIN` role to navigate to this view

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Example of using [classname]#@RolesAllowed# to enable only users with the `ADMIN` role to navigate to this view
```

What typically can't be automated by these frameworks is data-based access rights, such as limiting access to specific entities.

As an example, if the server receives an ID of a User object to be displayed in, for example, a URL request parameter (`{yourapp.com}/users/4/edit`), then the ID in question can be freely changed by an attacker.
The application needs to be aware of this and check if the currently logged-in user has access rights to this entity.

> This is something that is common for all UI frameworks, and not specific to Vaadin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is something that is common to all UI frameworks, and not specific to Vaadin.
```

// end::spring-security-integration-ref[]
https://vaadin.com/tutorials/securing-your-app-with-spring-security[Securing your app with Spring Security].

== View-Based Access Control

[role="since:com.vaadin:vaadin@V21 standalone"]
--
--

> Since Vaadin 21, it is possible to use built-in view-based access control mechanism to secure Flow navigation targets, but as mentioned in <<Authentication and Authorization,Authentication and Authorization>> it is not mandatory to use it, so it is not enabled by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since Vaadin 21, it is possible to use a built-in view-based access control mechanism to secure Flow navigation targets.
However, as mentioned in <<Authentication and Authorization,Authentication and Authorization>>, it is not mandatory to use it, so it is not enabled by default.
```

The view-based access control mechanism uses the `@AnonymousAllowed`, `@PermitAll`, `@RolesAllowed`, and `@DenyAll` annotations on view classes to define the access control rules.

.There is a detailed document for Flow applications based on Spring Boot
[NOTE]
If your Vaadin Flow application is based on Spring Boot, it is strongly recommended following the dedicated documentation for using <<{articles}/flow/integrations/spring/view-based-access-control#, View-Based Access Control in Vaadin Flow Spring Boot applications>>.

> To enable and use this mechanism, the following should be added to a Vaadin Flow application (if not exist already):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enable and use this mechanism, the following should be added to a Vaadin Flow application (if it does not exist already):
```

- A Login view.
- A `VaadinServiceInitListener` that adds `ViewAccessChecker` as the `BeforeEnterListener` of all UIs.

> - A Service Provider under `META-INF/services` to load above custom ServiceInitListener via Java SPI loading mechanism.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A Service Provider under `META-INF/services` to load above the custom ServiceInitListener via the Java SPI loading mechanism.
```

=== Adding Login View

> Having a login view is one of the basic requirements of many authentication and authorization mechanisms to be able to redirect the anonymous users to that page before giving the access of viewing any protected resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Having a login view is one of the basic requirements of many authentication and authorization mechanisms.
It serves to redirect anonymous users to that page before granting access to view any protected resources.
```

.`LoginView.java`
[source,java]
----
@Route("login")
@PageTitle("Login")
public class LoginView extends VerticalLayout implements BeforeEnterObserver {

    private LoginForm login = new LoginForm();

    public LoginView() {
        addClassName("login-view");
        setSizeFull();

        setJustifyContentMode(JustifyContentMode.CENTER);
        setAlignItems(Alignment.CENTER);

        login.setAction("login");

        add(new H1("Test Application"), login);
    }

    @Override
    public void beforeEnter(BeforeEnterEvent beforeEnterEvent) {
        if(beforeEnterEvent.getLocation()
            .getQueryParameters()
            .getParameters()
            .containsKey("error")) {
            login.setError(true);
        }
    }
}
----

.Usage of Vaadin's LoginForm Component
[NOTE]

> In this example, Vaadin's `LoginForm` component is used to make the implementation more brief, but there is no obligation to do so, feel free to implement your own Login view, as you wish.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example, Vaadin's `LoginForm` component is used for the sake of brevity.
However, feel free to implement your own login view, if you wish.
```

=== Adding VaadinServiceInitListener

> To be able to restrict the access to the views, a `BeforeEnterListener` must be registered for the `VaadinService` which initialize and enable the `ViewAccessChecker`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to restrict access to views, a `BeforeEnterListener` must be registered for the `VaadinService`, to initialize and enable the `ViewAccessChecker`:
```

.ViewAccessCheckerInitializer.java
[source,java]
----
import com.vaadin.flow.server.ServiceInitEvent;
import com.vaadin.flow.server.VaadinServiceInitListener;
import com.vaadin.flow.server.auth.ViewAccessChecker;
import org.vaadin.example.views.login.LoginView;

public class ViewAccessCheckerInitializer implements VaadinServiceInitListener {

    private ViewAccessChecker viewAccessChecker;

    public ViewAccessCheckerInitializer() {
        viewAccessChecker = new ViewAccessChecker(); // <1>
        viewAccessChecker.enable(); // <2>
        viewAccessChecker.setLoginView(LoginView.class); // <3>
    }

    @Override
    public void serviceInit(ServiceInitEvent serviceInitEvent) {
        serviceInitEvent.getSource().addUIInitListener(uiInitEvent -> {
            uiInitEvent.getUI().addBeforeEnterListener(viewAccessChecker); // <4>
        });
    }
}
----

The above code contains some notable pieces of the View-Base Access Control mechanism:

> <1> `ViewAccessChecker` which is the at core of this access control mechanism, is instantiated.
> <2> `ViewAccessChecker` is enabled. Note that it is not enabled by default.
> <3> `LoginView` class is set to the `viewAccessChecker` instance, now it knows where to redirect unauthenticated users.
> <4> `viewAccessChecker` instance is set as the `BeforeEnterListener` in the overridden `serviceInit` method.
> Now it is ready to intercept the attempts for entering to all views.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<1> `ViewAccessChecker`, which is at the core of this access control mechanism, is instantiated.
<2> `ViewAccessChecker` is enabled. Note that it is not enabled by default.
<3> `LoginView` class is set to the `viewAccessChecker` instance. Now it knows where to redirect unauthenticated users.
<4> The `viewAccessChecker` instance is set as the `BeforeEnterListener` in the overridden `serviceInit` method.
Now it is ready to intercept attempts to enter all views.
```

> However, the above class still needs to be loaded, so it is recommended to follow the instructions of the next step.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, the above class still needs to be loaded, so we recommend following the instructions in the next step.
```

=== Enable Loading of VaadinServiceInitListener

> To enable Java SPI loading mechanism to load the above `ViewAccessCheckerInitializer` as the `VaadinServiceInitListener`, it is needed to do the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enable the Java SPI loading mechanism to load the above `ViewAccessCheckerInitializer` as the `VaadinServiceInitListener`, do the following:
```

> - Under `resources/META-INF/services` directory, create a file named exactly as:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Under `resources/META-INF/services` directory, create a file named exactly:
```

[text,text]
----
com.vaadin.flow.server.VaadinServiceInitListener
----

- Put the fully qualified name of `ViewAccessCheckerInitializer` into this newly created file.

> For example, if `ViewAccessCheckerInitializer` class is in `org.vaadin.example.security` package, the following value should be in the file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, if the [classname]#ViewAccessCheckerInitializer# class is in the `org.vaadin.example.security` package, the following value should be in the file:
```

.Text value that should be the `com.vaadin.flow.server.VaadinServiceInitListener` file:
[text,text]
----
org.vaadin.example.security.ViewAccessCheckerInitializer
----

> This Service Provider config file would trigger Java SPI loading mechanism to load `ViewAccessCheckerInitializer` during the application startup.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This Service Provider config file triggers the Java SPI loading mechanism to load `ViewAccessCheckerInitializer` during application startup.
```

More information on this can be found <<{articles}/flow/advanced/service-init-listener#,here>>.

=== Access Annotations

> Before providing a usage examples of the access annotations, it would be beneficial to have a closer look at the annotations, and their meaning when applied on a view:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before we see some examples of access annotations, it is worth having a closer look at the annotations, and their meaning when applied to a view:
```

> - `@AnonymousAllowed` Permits anyone to navigate to the view without any authentication or authorization.
> - `@PermitAll` Allows any *authenticated* user to navigate to the view.
> - `@RolesAllowed` Grants access to users having the roles specified in the annotation value.
> - `@DenyAll` Disallows to navigate to the view for everyone.
> This is the default, which means if a view is not annotated at all, the `@DenyAll` logic would be applied.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [classname]#@AnonymousAllowed# permits anyone to navigate to the view without any authentication or authorization.
- [classname]#@PermitAll# allows any *authenticated* user to navigate to the view.
- [classname]#@RolesAllowed# grants access to users having the roles specified in the annotation value.
- [classname]#@DenyAll# disallows everyone from navigating to the view.
This is the default, which means that, if a view is not annotated at all, the [classname]#@DenyAll# logic is applied.
```

Some usage examples:

> .Example of using @AnonymousAllowed to enable all users navigating to this view

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.Example of using @AnonymousAllowed to enable all users to navigate to this view
```

[source,java]
----
@Route(value = "", layout = MainView.class)
@PageTitle("Public View")
@AnonymousAllowed
public class PublicView extends VerticalLayout {
    // ...
}
----

> .Example of using @PermitAll to allow only authenticated users (with any role) navigating to this view

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.Example of using @PermitAll to allow only authenticated users (with any role) to navigate to this view
```

[source,java]
----
@Route(value = "private", layout = MainView.class)
@PageTitle("Private View")
@PermitAll
public class PrivateView extends VerticalLayout {
    // ...
}
----

> .Example of using @RolesAllowed to enable only the users with `ADMIN` role navigating to this view

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.Example of using @RolesAllowed to enable only users with the `ADMIN` role to navigate to this view
```

[source,java]
----
@Route(value = "admin", layout = MainView.class)
@PageTitle("Admin View")
@RolesAllowed("ADMIN") // <- Should match one of the user's roles (case-sensitive)
public class AdminView extends VerticalLayout {
    // ...
}
----

> Now if the application is started, by navigating to `http://localhost:8080` `PublicView` contents should be available without any authentication.
> However, by navigating to `http://localhost:8080/private` or `http://localhost:8080/admin` the user would be redirected to the specified `LoginView`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, if the application is started by navigating to `http://localhost:8080`, `PublicView` contents should be available without any authentication.
However, by navigating to `http://localhost:8080/private` or `http://localhost:8080/admin`, the user is redirected to the specified `LoginView`.
```

> // TODO: Consider adding more details and snippet codes to showcase how the followings can be achieved:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// TODO: Consider adding more details and snippet code to showcase how the following can be achieved:
```

// 1. login with some users with different roles
// 2. save the requested URL to redirect to it after a successful login

If multiple annotations specified on a single view, the following rules are applied:

- `DenyAll` overrides other annotations
- `AnonymousAllowed` overrides `RolesAllowed` and `PermitAll`
- `RolesAllowed` overrides `PermitAll`

> However, specifying more than one of the above access annotations on a view class in not recommended, as it is confusing and probably has no logical reason to do so.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, we do not recommend specifying more than one of the above access annotations on a view class.
It is confusing and probably has no logical purpose.
```

== Application State

> The server is always aware of your application state. Compared to client side applications, this means that the server is aware of what is currently visible on the end-user's screen. Hence Vaadin denies actions to components that are not currently visible on the screen, or components that have been disabled on the server.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The server is always aware of your application state. 
Compared to client-side applications, this means that the server is aware of what is currently visible on the end user's screen. 
Hence, Vaadin denies actions to components that are not currently visible on the screen, or those that have been disabled on the server.
```

// end::spring-security-integration-ref[]
https://vaadin.com/tutorials/securing-your-app-with-spring-security[Securing your app with Spring Security].

== View-Based Access Control

> [role="since:com.vaadin:vaadin@V20 standalone"]

Reviewer 3: Wrong version, we're building 21 not 20

Author: Thanks! Done.

--
--

> Vaadin Flow comes with a built-in view-based access control that can be used as the main access control mechanism, but as mentioned in <<Authentication and Authorization,Authentication and Authorization>> it is not mandatory to use it, so it is not enabled by default.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since Vaadin 21, it is possible to use built-in view-based access control mechanism to secure Flow navigation targets, but as mentioned in <<Authentication and Authorization,Authentication and Authorization>> it is not mandatory to use it, so it is not enabled by default.
```

To enable and use this mechanism, the following should be added to a Vaadin Flow application (if not exist already):

- A Login view.
- A `VaadinServiceInitListener` that adds `ViewAccessChecker` as the `BeforeEnterListener` of all UIs.
- A Service Provider under `META-INF/services` to load above custom ServiceInitListener via Java SPI loading mechanism.

=== Adding Login View
Having a login view is one of the basic requirements of many authentication and authorization mechanisms to be able to redirect the anonymous users to that page before giving the access of viewing any protected resources.

.`LoginView.java`
[source,java]
----
@Route("login")
@PageTitle("Login")
public class LoginView extends VerticalLayout implements BeforeEnterObserver {

    LoginForm login = new LoginForm();

    public LoginView() {
        addClassName("login-view");
        setSizeFull();

        setJustifyContentMode(JustifyContentMode.CENTER);
        setAlignItems(Alignment.CENTER);

        login.setAction("login");

        add(
            new H1("Test Application"),

>             login

Reviewer 3: Non-blocking nit: extra whitespace that makes IMO no sense

Author: Done.

        );
    }

    @Override
    public void beforeEnter(BeforeEnterEvent beforeEnterEvent) {
        if(beforeEnterEvent.getLocation()

>         .getQueryParameters()

Reviewer 3: Non-blocking nit: the indent is weird

Author: Done.
